Diego Navarro
IS 340 Project Management Final paper
Digitization Nation-OCR assisted File Digitization.
Abstract
	Digitization Nation aims to revolutionize the digitization process for galleries, libraries, archives, and museums (GLAM institutions) by leveraging Optical Character Recognition (OCR) and open-source technologies. Digitizing physical files not only saves valuable storage space but also enhances accessibility for staff, patrons, and researchers. However, the current manual process of sorting, naming, and organizing digitized files is labor-intensive and time-consuming. This project streamlines file digitization through Python-powered automation, using Tesseract OCR for text extraction and Ghostscript to convert documents into PDF/A, the archival standard for long-term preservation. Key functionalities include automated document classification, schema-based file naming, and batch processing for efficiency. The system is designed to be modular and adaptable, accessible through a Flask-based web dashboard for ease of use. With an emphasis on open-source collaboration, Digitization Nation aspires to provide GLAM institutions with a customizable, scalable, and user-friendly solution to manage their digitization needs, while also laying a foundation for future enhancements such as machine learning-driven classification and an intuitive graphical user interface (GUI)
Introduction
Many galleries, libraries, archives, and museums deal with a backlog of physical files that they wish to digitize.  The digitization of files is very important for a multitude of reasons.  First is storage, a cabinet full of physical files could easily fit on a hard drive the size of a finger, and a room of files could be stored across a couple of hard drives.  Digitized files are also easier to access, both for workers in these heritage institutions and for patrons or researchers.  Physical files have to be handled and stored in certain ways that means you have to book appointments to view documents for a limited amount of time.  These reasons are why digitization of documents is important, but the process is laborious.  Workers with commercial document scanners have to sort, scan, name, convert and place files in their correct digital folders.  I think a lot of this work can be done through Optical Character Recognition.
	Optical Character Recognition is an exciting technology when it comes to this project.  As described by Google Cloud, OCR is “a foundational technology behind the conversion of typed, handwritten or printed text from images into machine-encoded text”(Google Cloud, n.d.).  With the help of OCR and the training of a model that recognizes the unique characteristics of each document type, the process of digitizing files can be streamlined.
Project Motivation and Goals
	As someone who works in a museum doing this file digitization work I have thought about how this process could be simplified.  At work it is usually me and one or two other people working on these files and it may not seem like a lot but the time can really add up.  Whether it be weirdly shaped documents or excessive and repetitive file types, something always comes in the way of a good working experience.  Sometimes I am copying and pasting the same couple of phrases and only changing a number.  I think a lot of the hard work of identifying, labeling, and cataloging can easily be done by a trained model.  Many standardized documents have the important information in the same general area and look similar, for example a catalog card usually has some kind of identifying number and a little bit of information.  Depending on the schema an institution uses and the files we are working with I believe a lot of this work can easily be done with the assistance of a human overseer.  The goals for this project are to create a program that:
-Reads a document and identifies its file type
-apply a relevant schema (in this example accessionnumber_filetype)
-convert the file into a PDF standard
	As for the way this project will be run, I believe that open-source is the best avenue.  GLAM institutions already deal with gatekeeping information from the public, and I think this project would benefit heritage institutions as a whole.  People active in the GLAM community, from what I have seen, are generally very helpful and love to help others with their information needs, so I think this program should be no different.  Having this tool be operable and customizable for any institution's needs is very important to me, so to that end the work needs to stay open source.


Technical Overview
The Digitization Nation project will utilize a modular and open-source technology stack to streamline the file digitization and organization for GLAM institutions.  The core system will be powered by Python, selected not only because I have the most familiarity with it but because it has an extensive library ecosystem and is very adabale.  The Optical Character Recognition will be performed by Tesseract, more specifically Python-tesseract.  Pytessaract is a wrapper for the tesseract engine (Madmaze, 2014) making the engine operable in a Python environment.  Tesseract is an open source engine capable of extracting text from printed and handwritten documents, which is perfect as many documents are very old and only exist in handwritten form. From here the data taken from OCR will be parsed to identify the specific and relevant information.  Regex patterns will then identify the similarities in files (V, 2024) and then using naming schemas will name the files.  Files will be converted to archival PDFs (PDF/A) using Ghostscript, an open-source alternative to the more traditional Adobe Acrobat.  The system architecture will be usable through a Flask web dashboard.  From there a script can be used to create files and they will be self sorted once put into a database.  Since storage needs vary I think this can be decided by the user or built upon.

Timeline
	My timeline is fairly simple and I think this means that it will not only be actionable but a great base to build off of.

PHASE 1 Week 1-2
Identification of our tools
Definition of the schema/file naming conventions
PHASE 2 Week 3-6
Implement OCR extraction
Build logic for schema
Integration of Ghostscript
PHASE 3 Week 7-8
Testing of prototype with sample documents
Collect feedback and fix issues
PHASE 4 Week 9-10
Package system for use (Flask app)
Write user manuals and guides
PHASE Future work
Add Machine Learning
GUI addition
File sorting capability
	Phase 1 will be the start of our project where we identify the tools we would like to use.  The schema that we will test with will also be developed here.  Every institution is different so a base will be helpful to test until we implement a way for schemas to be input into the system.  Phase 2 is when we start the real work.  We test the OCR capabilities to then be analyzed through parsing.  From there we will develop code that takes the parsed results and fits it into our schema.  From there we will implement Ghostscript and work on batch processing our files from PDF into Archival PDFs.  Once we have a working product we can gather feedback.  While we could work on the product more I think early feedback is a great way to work out problems before we become too committed and have to make more drastic changes later on.  Phase 4 we will work on making the product more user friendly with a simple Flask app and will work on creating manuals on how to use the product.  After that, we have future work.
Future Work
	This gets its own section because there is a lot to write about.  First would be file sorting capabilities.  I wanted to include it in the project originally but I think the ways that institutions will store their digital files varies too widely.  I think that this can either be built into a new app or it would be a new project to be integrated into the Digitization Nation program.  This can also be combined with a system that will display digitized files on an institution's website or even alongside displays of artifacts.
	Machine Learning will be a great replacement for our existing idea of parsing and regex.  I dont know much about Regex patterns but my research shows that this is a great yet complicated way of working with the data we gather from OCR and applying it to our naming schema.  Machine learning will replace the complicated coding we would have to do but we would also have to train the program on the different types of files.  Once training is done however the idea is that identification of files will be far simpler and will be able to be done with OCR rather than the two being two separate processes.
	A fully fleshed out GUI will make the program usable by a wider population.  It would simplify the process of developing your own schema and I would imagine a GUI could show statistics such as how many documents have been digitized and how many of each file type exists.  This will help teams using Digitization Nation better plan their own projects and collect data on what is in their physical, now digital, file collection.  
Community Outreach
	Being an open source project, the goal of Digitization Nation is to be applicable to as many institutions as possible.  Reaching out to different Information Scientists as well as heritage institutions will help us understand what needs should be met with this program.  I think this outreach can be split into pre development, current development, and post-launch.
Pre development, we would consult with a number of heritage institutions to gauge what the situation with their physical files looks like.  This will help us establish our base schema and test files we will use to help us in developing.  The understanding of the institution's needs will also help us with developing in the future.  Outreach at this step will also help us identify individuals we think will benefit our project and who we think we can benefit from learning from.  Open source work comes together when you learn from people from all different backgrounds who bring a unique perspective to your project.  
During development, getting feedback on how our product is working will help in further developing the product.  We could also here if there is anything else we should add we did not originally account for, such as file support either into the program or out of the program after converting our files.
Post-launch outreach will be important in not only bringing awareness to Digitization Nation and help us spread, but we can also develop future work.  Machine Learning is complicated and we would benefit from getting in front of as many eyes as possible who could lend their expertise to the project.  This same outreach can help with developing a GUI, both from learning what institutions find valuable in a usable interface but we can get advice from designers on what the best layout will be in terms of aesthetic and usability.  I think targeting smaller GLAMs with a prototype project will help us get in front of larger institutions and help with expanding to meet the needs of anyone who wishes to use our program.  Aside from GUI development we could hear what is needed in terms of storage mechanics, and if we even want to tackle that as another feature of our program.
Reflection and Conclusion
	This project has been really interesting to do.  I don't know much about open source programming, or programming in general.  I had to do a lot of research on how a project like this could be feasible since I have only done basic programming.  I remember when I looked up how to process OCR results into a schema I read about parsing and regex patterns.  I did a little parsing before in IS 310 but had to watch some videos about regex patterns.  Even though I was a bit unsure what exactly I was saying, I think I understood enough to be able to plan out my project.  I probably would have done something less complicated but I am really passionate about heritage institutions and excess physical files can be a real problem.  For the past two years I have worked at the Spurlock Museum and I have digitized thousands of files.  I don't mind working and I actually kind of enjoy it, but I thought recently there has to be a way this can be done easier.  So when this project came around I started putting some thought into it.  GLAMs are really important to me as my first ever job was as an Intern for the Chicago Public Library and on my first day I worked on digitizing physical files.  Allowing greater access to physical files will not only benefit GLAMs but also patrons who wish to research and learn.  I hope that some kind of system like this could come to fruition because it would be greatly beneficial

References
Google Cloud. (n.d.). OCR with Google AI. https://cloud.google.com/use-cases/ocr 

Madmaze. (2014, February 5). Pytesseract. PyPI. https://pypi.org/project/pytesseract/ 

V [Height Above Sea Level]. (2024, June 20). What are regular expressions? - RegEx beginner tutorial. YouTube. https://youtu.be/Jd3YyiJj8aM?si=_YQ_9S_CBx3N6LiP. 
